I

   THE SEASON when my sighing is renewed
Had come, stirring the memory of that day 
Whereon my love and suffering began.
   The sun was warming one and the other horn 
Of Taurus, and Tithonus' youthful bride
Sped in the coolness to her wonted station;
   Springtime and love and scorn and tearfulness 
Again had brought me to that Vale Enclosed 
Where from my heart its heavy burdens fall;
   And there, amid the grasses, faint from weeping, 
0'ercome with sleep, I saw a spacious light 
Wherein were ample grief and little joy.
   A leader, conquering and supreme, I saw, 
Such as triumphal chariots used to bear
To glorious honour on the Capitol.
   Never had I beheld a sight like this --
Thanks to the sorry age in which I live,
Bereft of valor, and o'erfilled with pride -- 
   And I, desirous evermore to learn, 
Lifted my weary eyes, and gazed upon
This scene, so wondrous and so beautiful
   Four steeds I saw, whiter than whitest snow, 
And on a fiery car a cruel youth
With bow in hand and arrows at his side.
   No fear had he, nor armor wore, nor shield,
But on his shoulders he had two great wings Of 
a thousand hues; his body was all bare.
   And round about were mortals beyond count: 
Some of them were but captives, some were slain, 
And some were wounded by his pungent arrows.
   Eager for tidings, I moved toward the throng, 
So that I came near to becoming one 
Of those who by his hand had lost their lives.
   Then I moved closer still, to see if any 
I recognized among the pressing host 
Following the king ne'er satisfied with tears.
   None did I seem to know; for if there were 
Among them any I had known, their looks 
Were changed by death or fierce captivity.
   Toward me there came a spirit somewhat less 
Distressed than the others, calling me by name, 
And saying: "These are the gains of those who love!"
   Wond'ring, I said to him: "How knowest thou 
My face? for thee I cannot recognize."
And he: "The heavy bonds that weigh me down
   Prevent thee, and the dimness of the air.
But I am a friend to thee, and I was born,
As thou, within the land of Tuscany."
   His words and the noble manner of his speech 
Revealed to me what his changed looks had hidden. 
So we took seat in a high and open place;
   And he began: "Long have I thought to see 
Thee here among us: from thine early years
Thy life foretold that this would be thy fate."
   " 'Twas even so; but then the toils of love 
Dismayed me so that I abandoned them,
My garments and my heart already rent."
   When I had spoken, and when he had heard
My answer, not without a smile he said:
"Oh my son, what a flame is lit for thee!"
   I did not understand him then, but now
So surely in my head his words are fixed
That ne'er more deeply was aught writ in marble.
   And in the boldness of my youth-when mind
And tongue are quick in utterance-I asked: 
"Pray, of your courtesy, what folk are these?"
   "Ere long," he answered, "thou thyself shalt know, 
Thyself being one of them: thou knowest not
How firm a bond is being made for thee.
   Thy looks shall fade, and white shall be thy hair, 
Before the bond I speak of is unloosed,
However much thy neck and feet rebel.
   And yet, to satisfy thy youthful wish,
I'll answer, telling of our master first,
Who rives ~s thus of life and liberty.
   For this is he whom the world calleth Love: 
Bitter, thou see'st, as thou wilt see more clearly 
When he shall be thy lord, as he is ours
   Gentle in youth and fierce as he grows old,
As who makes trial knows, and thou shalt know
In less than a thousand years, I prophesy.
   Idleness gave him birth, and wantonness,
And he was nursed by sweet and gentle thoughts, 
And a vain folk made him their lord and god.
   Some of his captives die forthwith; and some 
More pitilessly ruled, live out their lives
Under a thousand chains and a thousand keys.
   He who so lordly and so proud appears,
First of us all, is Caesar, whom in Egypt
Cleopatra bound, amid the flowers and grass.
   Now over him there is triumph; and 'tis well, 
Since he, though conqueror of the world, was vanquished, 
That Love, who vanquished him, should have the glory.
   Next comes his son--he too was one who loved, 
Although more nobly -- Caesar Augustus he,
Who took his Livia from her generous spouse.
   The third is Nero, pitiless and unjust:
See how he marches full of wrath and scorn.
A woman conquered him, strong though he seems.
   See the good Marcus, worthy of all praise,
His tongue and heart full of philosophy
And yet Faustina bends him to her will.
   Those two who walk in fear and in suspicion
Are Dionysius and that Alexander
Whose jealous thoughts led him unto his death.
   The next is he who by Antandros wept
Creusa's death, and took another bride
From that same prince who slew Evander's son.
   Thou wilt have heard of one who would not yield 
To a stepmother's passionate pursuit
And gained through flight escape from her entreaties:
   And yet his chaste and rightful steadfastness 
Brought him to death: for to such hatred turned
The love of Phaedra, terrible and malign.
   Herself she slew, perchance avenging thus 
Theseus, Hippolytus, and Ariadne,
Who, as thou know'st, sped, loving, to her death.
   Blaming another, one condemns oneself:
For he who takes delight in fraudulence
May not lament if he too be deceived.
   Behold then Theseus, captive, though so famed, 
Led between sisters twain who both met death: 
One set her love on him, he loved the other.
   With him is Hercules: for all his strength 
Love captured him. Achilles follows on,
who in his loving met with bitter grief
   That is Demophoon, and that is Phyllis;
And that is Jason: with him is Medea,
Who followed him, and Love, o'er land and sea,
   To father and to brother pitiless,
And toward her lover wild and fierce, as though 
She might be thus more worthy of his love.
   Hypsipyle comes after, and bemoans
The barbarous love that reft her of her own.
And then comes she who bears the vaunt of beauty,
   The shepherd with her from whose fateful sight 
Of her fair face came the tempestuous storms
That with their raging overturned the world.
   And then Oenone thou may'st hear lament 
For Paris; and for Helen, Menelaus.
Hermione for her Orestes calls,
   Laodamia for Protesilaus.
Argia, faithfully, for Polynices,
Unlike Amphiaraus' covetous wife.
   Hark to the sighs and weeping, hark to the cries 
Of these poor loving ones, who gave their souls 
Into the power of him who leads them thus.
   Nor could I ever name them all to thee:
Not only human folk but gods are here,
Filling the shadows of the myrtle grove.
   See lovely Venus, and with her see Mars,
His feet and arms and neck laden with chains. 
Yonder are Pluto and Proserpina.
   Behold the jealous Juno, and the blond 
Apollo, who once scorned the youthful bow 
That dealt him such a wound in Thessaly.
   What shall I say? To put it briefly, then, 
All Varro' s gods are here as prisoners, 
And, burdened with innumerable bonds,
   Before the chariot goes Jupiter."

II

   Weary with gazing, yet unsatisfied, 
I turned now this way and now that, and saw
Sights time will not suffice me to relate.
   My mind was moving on from thought to thought 
When it was drawn to two who side by side 
Were walking, and together gently weeping.
   'Twas their strange dress that made me notice them; 
Their foreign speech I could not understand 
Until my friend interpreted for me.
   And when I knew their names, I went to them
With more assurance: one of them for Rome
Felt friendliness-the other nought but hate.
   To one I spoke: "0 noble Masinissa, 
For Scipio's sake, and your companion's sake, 
Be not offended, prithee, by my words."
   Looking at me, he said: "Fain would I know 
Who thou mayst be, that so unerringly 
Both of my dear affections hast discerned."
   "I am not worthy to be known," I said,
"By such a knower: this slight flame of mine 
Hath not the power to cast its light so far.
   Thy royal fame extends throughout the world,
And binds to thee with the fair bond of love
Folk who have never seen thee, nor shall see.
   Now tell me, as ye hope for peace to come
(I pointed to their Leader), who ye are, 
Ye twain, who seem to be of wondrous faith."
   "Thy tongue, that is so ready with my name, 
Proves that thou know'st already who we are," 
Said he, "but I will speak to ease my grief
   To that great man so heartily allied 
Was I that not e'en Laelius loved him more: 
Where‘er his banners led, I followed them.
   Fortune to him was ever generous, 
Yet not beyond the measure of the worth 
That filled his soul past all comparison.
   After the Roman arms so gloriously 
Had spread their victories into the West, 
There Love found us and joined us, who are one.
   Never was sweeter flame in two hearts lit, 
Nor shall be. Nights too few, alas, 
Were for our great desires so brief and scarce
   (In vain, for us, our solemn marriage vow) 
That all the goodly reasons for our love 
And the sacred bond itself came soon to nought.
   For Scipio-worthier than all the world
With holy words bade us to separate, 
Nor could he heed the pity of our sighing.
   And though it brought and brings me bitter dole, 
Yet virtue shone in him so marvelously
That one is blind who cannot see that sun.
   To those who love, high justice is high doom; 
And thus the verdict of so great a friend
Stood like a rock to thwart enduring love.
   Father in honour, he to me; a son
In love; in years a brother: I obeyed,
With breaking heart and countenance distressed.
   So then this dear one came unto her death:
For, being subject to an alien foe,
She chose to die rather than live a slave.
   And I of mine own grief was minister,
For she so passionately entreated me
That I, who suffered that she might not suffer,
   Sent her the poison -with such sorrowing thought 
As she well knows and I remember well,
And thou mayst know, if thou too knowest love.
   All my inheritance from my bride was grief: 
Herself, and every happiness and hope,
I chose to lose, to keep my faith with her.
   But see now if thou findest in this dance
Aught that is worthy of note, for the time is short 
And thou hast more to see than the day can show."
   O'erwhelmed with pity, thinking of the brief 
Time granted to the love of such a pair,
My heart was like to snow that melts i' the sun,
   When, as they started on again, I heard:
"This man is friendly in himself, I ween, 
Yet for all Romans have I nought but hate."
   "Put now thy heart in peace, 0 Sophonisba, 
For by our hands the Carthage that was thine 
Hath fallen thrice, and will not rise again."
   But she replied: "Tell me another tale: 
Africa wept; but Rome had little cause 
For laughter-as your histories will confess."
   Then he who had loved both her and us moved on, 
Smiling, with her, amid the mighty throng, 
And presently they passed beyond my sight.
   As one who travels by a doubtful road 
And stops at every step, and looks about 
And ponders, hesitant and slow to move,
   E' en so the train of lovers made my steps 
Unsure and halting: for I sought to know 
With what a fire each burned, and how intense.
   I saw one to the left and out of line, 
Like to a man who something seeks and finds 
Wherefrom both shame and joy may come to him.
   To give to another man one's own dear spouse: 
Oh utmost love, unheard-of courtesy!
So that she too ashamed and joyous seemed
   For the exchange: and all three onward moved 
Talking together of their cherished loves,
And sighing for the land of Syria.
   I went to the three spirits, who together 
Were following a pathway of their own,
And to the first I said, "I pray thee, wait!"
   Hearing the accents of my Latin speech, 
Troubled in countenance, he stayed his steps;
And then, as though perceiving my desire,
   He said: "I am Seleucus, and this is
My son Antiochus, who warred with you
But right avails not against greater strength.
   And she who is with us was first my wife 
And then was his: for lest he die of love
To him I gave her, as in our land I might.
   Stratonica she is named; and as thou see'st
We are not divided: by that very sign 
Our love is manifest as strong and firm.
   She was content to leave me, queen no more; 
I to leave my delight; and he his life: 
Each thought another far the worthier.
   He would have perished in the flower of youth 
But for the wisdom of his good physician,
Who understood the cause of his distress.
   Loving in silence, he was. near to death
Constrained by love, silently virtuous
Mine was paternal love, that succored him."
   These words he spoke: then turned and started on, 
Like to a man moved by a new intent,
So quickly that I scarce could say farewell.
   After the spirit passed beyond my sight,
Leaving me pensive, I moved onward, sighing,
My heart still meditating on his words,
   Until a voice said to me: "Give no more
Heed to this single thought: there is much else
To see, and, as thou know'st, the time is short."
   More were the lovers here, captive and bare, 
Than all the soldiers Xerxes led to Greece
The host extending farther than my sight.
   Of many tongues and many lands they were. 
Hardly of one in a thousand did I learn
The name; and of those few my tale shall be.
   Perseus was there, from whom 
I sought to know Of the Ethiopian maiden whom he loved, 
Andromeda, dark of eye and dark of hair.
   There the vain lover was who through desire
Of his own mirrored beauty was undone,
Poor only in that he possessed too much
   A blossom he became, that bears no fruit,
And she who, loving him, a floating voice
Became, her gentle body turned to stone.
   There too was Iphis, quick to his own ill,
Who, loving vainly, hated his own life;
And many more who knew like suffering,
   Folk crossed in love who had no wish to live. 
Moderns I saw among them, but to tell
Their unrenowned names I will not stay.
   Those two were there whom Love companions made 
Forever, Ceyx and Halcyone,
Nest-builders by the sea in winter's calm.
   Near to these twain I beheld Aesacus
Seeking Hesperia-now on rocky shore,
Now under sea, now flying through mid air.
   The cruel daughter of Nisus there I saw,
Swift in her flight; and Atalanta running, 
By golden apples vanquished, and the beauty
   Of her Hippomenes: his rivals all 
Lost both the fateful race and their own lives, 
And he alone could boast of victory.
   Among these vain and fabled loves I saw 
Acis, with Galatea in his arms,
And Polyphemus roaring in his wrath.
   I saw the sea-borne Glaucus in the throng 
Without her who alone was dear to him,
And heard him name one who had loved too well;
   Canens and Picus, erst a Latian king
And now a bird-and she who wrought the change 
Left him his name and his fair royal robe.
   I saw Egeria weeping; and beheld
Scylla transformed into a rugged rock 
That menaces the sea of Sicily;
   And her who with a quill in her right hand 
Writes as one overwhelmed with desperate grief, 
And in her left hand holds the dagger dose;
   Pygmalion, with his statue come to life; 
And many more whose names had oft been sung 
By Helicon and the Castalian spring;
   And fair Cydippe, whom an apple won.

   III

   So filled with marvels was this heart of mine 
That like a man who cannot speak I stood, 
Waiting in silence for another's voice,
   Till my friend said to me: "What thinkest thou? 
Why dost thou ever gaze? Knowest thou not
That I am of the throng, and must move on?"
   "Brother," I answered, "well thou knowest me: 
So eagerly do I desire to learn
That the desire itself impedes my learning."
   And he: "Thy silence I can comprehend: 
Thou dost desire to know these other folk,
And I will tell thee, if it be allowed.
   Behold him there to whom the rest pay honour, 
For he is Pompey. With him is Cornelia:
Of the vile Ptolemy she complains and weeps.
   Beyond him, the great Grecian king sees not 
The evil Clytemnestra nor Aegisthus:
Now canst thou tell if love be blind indeed!
   See Hypermnestra, faithful in her love;
See Pyramus and Thisbe in the shade,
Leander swimming, Hero at the window.
   Ulysses moves in thought, a kindly soul:
His faithful wife entreats him to return,
But ardent Circe will not let him go.
   Then comes Hamilcar's son, :vhom for so long 
Nor Rome nor all of Italy could defeat;
Yet he fell captive to an Apulian maid.'
   She who, with locks shorn closely, everywhere 
Follows her lord, in Pontus ruled as queen,
But is herself in servitude to love.
   Portia refmes her love by fire and steel;
Julia complains that Pompey's love for her 
Has faded, yielding to a second flame.
   Now look this way: behold the patriarch, 
Mocked and yet constant, who through seven years
Served to win Rachel, then for seven more:
   A mighty love that hardship could not quell! 
Behold his father, and his father's sire, 
Who with his wife went out to a new land.
   See then how love in evil cruelty 
Overcame David, leading him to a sin 
He was to weep for in a dark retreat.
   See how the cloud of love likewise obscures 
The clear fame of the wisest of his sons, 
Leading him far astray from the Lord above.
   Of another son, who loves and yet loves not, 
Tamar, 0'erwhelmed by her disdainful grief, 
Turns in complaint to her brother Absalom.
   Closely beyond her, Samson you may see, 
Stronger than he is wise, who foolishly 
Laid low his head upon a hostile lap.
   There too is Holophernes, overcome
In spite of swords and lances, by the words
And the cheeks of a widow, and by love and sleep.
   And see her then, as with her serving-maid
She bears on her return the dreadful head,
In haste, at midnight, giving thanks to God.
   See Shechem, stained with the doubly flowing blood 
O slaughter and of rite, and with him see
His father and his people caught by fraud
   All this the outcome of a sudden love.
See how Ahasuerus seeks to cure
His love, that he may find some quietness:
   One knot he severs, and another ties,
Finding a remedy for his distress
E' en as one nail may drive another out.
   If thou wouldst witness in a single heart
Delight and dole, bitter and sweet, behold
Herod, beset by love and cruelty. .
   See how he burns, how then he turns to rage: 
Repenting him of his own fearsome sin,
He cries for Mariamne, who hears not.
   Here are three ladies fair who loved right well, 
Procris and Artemisia, and with them
Deidamia. Here are other three
   Whose love was evil: and Semiramis,
Byblis and Myrrha are oppressed with shame
For their unlawful and distorted love.
   Here too are those who fill our books with dreams: 
Lancelot, Tristram, and the other knights
Whose wand' rings lead the common folk astray;
   Guinevere and Iseult, among the rest;
The twain of Rimini, who together go,
Forever uttering their sad laments."
   Thus did he speak; and I, as one who dreads
A coming ill, and trembles ere he hears
The sound of the trumpet, and feels future wounds,
   Was pale as one removed from the tomb,
When by my side appeared a youthful maid,
Purer by far than e'en the whitest dove.
   She took me captive: I, who would have sworn 
To make defense against men bearing arms,
Was bounden by her words and by her ways.
   And as I now remember, then my friend
Came closer to me, and he laughed at me
Thinking thereby to give me greater dole
   And whispered to me: "Now thou too art free 
Thyself to speak to any of us all,
For all of us are stained with the same pitch."
   I was as one of those who more regret
Another's good than one's own ill, seeing her,
My capturer, in liberty and peace.
   And as I know too well, and all too late,
Her beauty wrought a deadly snare for me,
Burning with envy, jealousy, and love.
   I could not take my eyes from her fair face
As one who is ill, and yet desires a food
Sweet to the taste, but certain to do harm
   To every other pleasure blind and deaf,
Following her through paths so perilous
That I still tremble when I think of them.
   Since then mine eyes have been downcast and wet, 
My heart oppressed with care, my shelter nought
Save founts and streams, and mountains, woods, and rocks.
   Ever since then the pages that I fill
With thoughts and tears and ink are soon destroyed, 
And others written for no better fate.
   Ever since then I know the life of love,
By love imprisoned, with love's hopes and fears
Writ on my brow for him who will to read.
   The fair one whom I hunt eludes me still,
Careless of me and of my sufferings,
Proud of her power and my captivity.
   And yet, if I discern aright, this lord,
The lord of love, who dominates the world,
Fears her, and leaves me thus bereft of hope.
   I have no strength or courage for defense:
He in whom I had hoped still leads her on
In cruelty to others and to me.
   No one can bind her with the bonds of love: 
Rebellious and untamed she goes her way
Alone, love's banners meaning nought to her.
   A bearing that is hers and only hers,
Her smile, her words, and even her disdains
Make her, in truth, a sun among the stars.
   Her locks, now bound in gold, now free to the wind, 
Her eyes, illumined with celestial light,
Inflame me, making me content to burn.
   Who could find words to tell of what she is,
Of her benignity and gentlehood?
My words are but as brooks are to the sea.
   No one like her has e'er been seen before
Nor yet will ever be beheld again,
No tongue can say of her what should be said.
   Thus I am captive, and thus she is free.
I entreat day and night (0 evil star!), 
And of a thousand prayers she scarce hears one.
   Hard is the law of Love! but though unjust 
One must obey it, for that law prevails
Throughout the universe, and lasts for aye.
   Now know I how the heart is rent in twain, 
And how it can make peace or war or truce,
And how it may conceal its malady,
   And how my blood retreats, and leaves me pale 
When I am filled with fear, or rushes red
Into my cheeks, when I am stirred by shame.
   I know the serpent hiding in the grass,
And how uncertainty may banish sleep,
How without illness one may faint and die.
   I know the seeking of my lady's ways,
And fear of finding her; and I know how
I am transformed into her I love.
   I know the changing of my mood and will 
And colour, 'mid long sighs and brief delight,
My very soul divided from my heart.
   I can deceive myself a thousand times
Within a day; and, following her, I freeze
When I am near her, burning when afar.
   I know how Love can roar throughout the mind, 
Expelling thought; and in how many ways
The heart may suffer till it faint and fail
   I know how little hemp it takes to bind
A gentle soul, when it is all alone
And there is none to help in its defense.
   I know how Love may fly and bend his bow, 
How now he threatens, and how now he strikes, 
And how he steals and bears his theft away.
   I know how mutable his actions are,
How arm'd his hands, how blinded are his eyes, 
His promises how empty of all faith,
   And how his fire feeds still upon my frame 
And lives, a hidden passion, in my veins, 
Burning me evermore, and threatening death:
   A little sweetness ends in bitterness.

   IV

   After my fortune into another's power 
Had driven me, and had cut all the nerves 
Of the liberty that erstwhile had been mine,
   I, who had been as wild as the forest deer, 
Was swiftly tamed, even as all the rest 
Of those who suffered in Love's servitude.
   Their toils I witnessed, and the fruits of toil,
And saw what tortuous ways and what deceits 
Had made them captives in the train of Love.
   While I was looking here and there to see
If any of them had risen to renown
For pages they had writ, or old or new,
   I beheld him who loved Eurydice:
E' en to the world below he followed her,
And calls her still, with a tongue now cold in death.
   I saw Alcaeus, skilled in verse of love,
And Pindar, and Anacreon, who led
His Muses into the one port of Love;
   And I saw Virgil; and it seemed to me
He had companions whom the olden world
Had gladly read, for wisdom and delight:
   Ovid was there, and with him were Catullus, 
Propertius, and Tibullus, and they all
Were fervid singers of the power of Love.
   And with these noble poets, side by side, 
Singing, there went a gentle Grecian maid, 
Whose manner was her own, and sweet and rare.
   And looking then now this way and now that, 
I saw folk coming over a green sward,
Speaking of love, but in the common tongue:
   Dante and Beatrice, Cino and her he loved, 
Guittone of Arezzo, ill content
Not to be held as first among them all.
   Here were both Guidos, held in high esteem; 
And Ser Onesto; and from Sicily
Those who, once first, were now no more than last;
   Sennuccio and Franceschino, kindly men,
As all men knew. Then came a company
Foreign in dress, and foreign in their speech:
   First of them all was Arnaut Daniel,
Master in love; and he his native land
Honors with the strange beauty of his verse.
   Here too were ready prisoners of Love,
Both Peires, and the less far-famed Arnaut;
And those whom Love found harder to defeat:
   The two Raimbauts, one of them he who sang Of 
Monferrato and its Beatrice;
And the old Peire d' Alvernhe, and Giraut;
   Folquet, who to Marseilles has given the name 
He took from Genoa, and at the end of life 
Changed dress and state to win a better land;
   Jaufre Rudel, who used both sail and oar
In voyaging to his death; and that Guillem
Who for his singing lost the flower of life.
   Aimeric and Bernart, Dc and Gaucelm,
And many more I saw, for whom the tongue 
Was ever lance and sword, helmet and targe.
   I turned again-since I must voice my grief
To our own folk, and saw Tomasso there, 
Ornament of Bologna, who lies now
   In a Sicilian grave. Oh sweetness brief,
Oh weary life! who carried thee away
So soon, thou who wast ever by my side?
   Where art thou now, who lately wast with me? 
This mortal life, that we do cherish so,
Is an ill dream, a tale of vain romance!
   Not far from the common path had 
I yet moved When first I saw my Socrates, and with him
My Laelius: with them I still move on.
   Oh what a pair of friends! Never could I
In verse or prose tell rightly of their worth
If at its due pure virtue be esteemed.
   With these twain I have travelled many lands, 
A common yoke holding us close together:
To them I told the tale of all my wounds.
   N or time nor distance e'er shall separate
Us from each other-so I hope and pray
Until for us the funeral pyres be lit.
   With them I plucked the glorious laurel branch 
Wherewith-perhaps too soon-I decked my brow, 
Remembering her whom I so deeply love.
   And yet from her, who fills my heart with thoughts, 
Ne'er have I gathered either branch or leaf,
So hard and so unyielding were her roots.
   Wherefore, though overcome with grief betimes, 
Like one offended, what I now beheld
With mine own eyes bids me to grieve no more.
   Matter for tragedy, not for comedy,
To see him captured who is held a god
By slow and blunted and deluded minds!
   But first I'll tell of what he did with us
And then of all that he himself endured
A tale for Homer, or for Orpheus!
   We followed, in the sound of the red wings
of the flying coursers, through a thousand woes,
Until to his maternal realm he came;
   N or were our chains made lighter or removed
As we were drawn through mountain heights and woods, 
So that we knew not in what world we were.
   Beyond the Aegean's sighs and tears there lies
The softest and the gentlest of all isles
Warmed by the sun or watered by the sea;
   And hidden in the midst a shadowy hill
With fragrances so sweet and streams so clear
That from the heart they banish manly thoughts.
   This is the land that Venus held so dear
Sacred to her it was in the olden time
When truth lay still unknown and unrevealed --
   And even now it is so reft of worth,
Holds still so much of its first pagandom,
That to the bad' tis sweet, sour to the good.
   Here then to triumph came the mighty lord 
Of us and all whom with the selfsame snare
He had caught, from Thule to the Indian sea:
   Thoughts in our bosoms, emptiness to grasp, 
Fleeting delights, and constant weariness,
Roses in winter, ice in summertime;
   Before us doubtful love and fleeting joy, 
Behind us nought but penitence and dole
As the realm of Rome well knows, and that of Troy;
   And the whole valley echoed with the songs
Of waters and of birds, and all its swards
Were white and green and red and yellow and perse.
   Streamlets that spring from living fountains run 
Through the fresh verdure in the summer heat 
When shade is deep and gentle is the breeze:
   And then, when winter comes and the air is cool, 
Warm sun, games, food, and torpid idleness
That casts its evil spell on foolish hearts.
   It was the season when the equinox
Gives victory to the day, and Procne comes, 
And Philomel, for their sweet springtime task.
   Alas, the instability of fate!
For there, and at the very time and hour
That draws a tearful tribute from my eyes
   He held his triumph whom the common folk 
Adore, and I beheld what servitude
And death and torment wait for one who loves.
   Errors and dreams and vain imaginings 
Were gathered at his great triumphal arch,
And at his palace gates were false beliefs,
   And slippery hopes were high upon the stairs 
Where he who climbs the highest falls the most, 
Where it is ill to gain and well to lose;
   Weary repose, peace hardly to be won, 
Dishonour bright, and glory dark and black, 
Perfidious loyalty and constant fraud;
   Incessant madness, slothfulness in thought, 
A prison entered by wide-open gates
Whence passage for escape is ill to find;
   Descending slopes that are of steep ascent. 
Within the palace mad confusion reigns
Of certain sorrows and uncertain joys.
   Ne'er boiled volcano with such furious rage
Lipari, Ischia, Aetna, Stromboli.
Who risks such game has little thought for self
   It was within this dark and narrow cage
That we were shut, and there, and all too soon
My hair turned white, and all my looks were changed;
   And all the while, dreaming of liberty,
I fed my soul, impatient for escape,
By thinking of the loves of olden times.
   Like snow that melts away in the sun was I, 
Gazing at the great spirits here confined
Like one beholding lengthy painted scenes,
   Whose eyes look back, despite his hurried feet.
