I

   WHEN DEATH had triumphed in the countenance
That had so often triumphed over me,
And when the sun was taken from our world,
   That pitiless and evil one had gone,
Pallid in aspect, horrible, and proud,
By whom the light of beauty had been quenched.
   Then, as I gazed across the grassy vale
I saw appearing on the other side
Her who saves man from the tomb, and gives him life.
   As at the break of day an amorous star
Comes from the east before the rising sun,
Who gladly enters her companionship,
   Thus came she. From what rhetoricians' school 
Shall come the master who could fully tell
What I shall only tell in simple words?
   The sky all round about was now so bright
My eyes were vanquished by its brilliancy,
In spite of the desire that filled my heart.

   Those who attended her bore on their brows 
The signs of worthiness: among them were
Some I had seen aforetime bound by Love.
   At her right hand, where first I bent mine eyes, 
Were Scipio and Caesar; but which one
Was closer to her I could not discern.
   One of the twain served virtue and not love, 
The other served them both. Then there appeared, 
Following those who were so glorious,
   Folk armed alike with valor and with steel, 
As in the triumphs that in olden times
Proceeded through the sacred ways of Rome.
   They came in the order I shall now set forth, 
And every one in aspect seemed to bear
The name that is most glorious of all.
   I was intent upon their noble talk,
Their faces, and their actions. The first two
Were followed by a grandson, and a son
   Who was unique and peerless in the world; 
And those who willed to block the enemy
With their own bodies, fathers two, were there,
   Companioned by three sons. One went before, 
And two came afterward: the last being first
In honor for the praise that he had won.
   Then, flashing like a ruby bright, came one 
Who with his counsel and his bravery
Rescued all Italy in the time of need:
   I speak of Claudius, who in the silent night, 
When he saw the Metaurus, came to purge
The fields of Rome of all their evil growth,
   For he had eyes for sight, and wings for speed. 
And after him there came a great old man
Who with his art held Hannibal at bay.
   With him, two Catos and two Fabii,
Two Pauli, Bruti two, and two Marcelli, 
Regulus, who loved others more than self;
   Curio and Fabricius, nobler far
In poverty than Midas with his gold,
Or Crassus, rebels against honesty;
   Serranus following ever in their steps,
With Cincinnatus; great Camillus then,
Weary of life, but not of serving Rome;
   For he so highly won the honor of heaven 
That his clear virtue led him to return
Thither whence a blind rage had driven him.
   Then came Torquatus, he who smote his son, 
Preferring to be reft of him than that
His troops be reft of spirit and of strength;

   Then the two Decii who with their breasts 
Opened the hostile ranks. Oh fearsome vow,
That offered father and son to one same death!
   With them came Curtius, like to them avowed, 
Who plunged in armor into the great cave
That horribly within the Forum yawned;
   Laevinus, Mummius, and Attilius;
Flaminius, who conquered Greece by force,
But even more by generosity.
   He too was there who drew a noble ring 
Around the Syrian king, and with his brow
And with his tongue compelled him to consent;
   And he who, arm'd, alone, defended once
A hill whence later he was hurled; and he
Who held a bridge against all Tuscany;
   He also who had raised his hand in vain
Amid the enemy's host, and burned it then,
So wrathful that he felt no pain therefrom;
   And he who first was victor on the sea 
Against the Carthaginians; and he
Who by the islands scattered all their fleet;
   Appius, blinded, and his kindred all,
Ever oppressive to the humble plebs.
Then saw I a great man of gentle mien,

   Who had been first had not his light grown dim: 
He surely was for us as were for Thebes 
Epaminondas, Bacchus, and Hercules.
   But it is ill to live too long! And next
Him I beheld, the flower of his time,
Who from his skill and swiftness had his name.
   He in command was cruel and severe;
But he who followed was of kindly heart,
Worthy as captain and as man-at-arms.
   Noble Volumnius, meriting high praise,
Came then, who by his conduct had removed
A bleeding tumor, livid, and malign;
   Cossus and philo and Rutilius;
Then, at one side, three by themselves I saw,
Their bodies wounded, and their armor cleft,
   Three thunderbolts and mighty cliffs of war, 
Dentatus, Scaeva, Marcus Sergius,
Who through a younger kinsman lost his fame.
   Marius then, who crushed the German rage,
Jugurtha, and the Cimbri; Fulvius, 
Who against orders put ingrates to death;
   The nobler Fulvius; of the Gracchi one 
From all that garrulous and restless brood 
That tried the patience of the men of Rome;

   Metellus, who to all seemed glad and blest­
I do not say he was, for one sees not
Into a heart shut close in secrecy;
   His father and his heirs were there as well: 
From Macedon and from Numidia
They brought their booty, and from Crete and Spain.
   And then I saw Vespasian and the son
Who was fair and good (the other, fair and vile), 
Nerva and Trajan, trusty princes both,
   Hadrian, Antonine his foster son,
Marcus Aurelius too-a goodly set,
For good men want good men to follow them.
   While in my eagerness I looked ahead
I saw the founder of Rome and its next five kings: 
The last was buried under his burden of shame,
   As doth befall scorners of righteousness.

II

   Filled with amazement endless and profound 
At the sight of these heroic men of Rome­
Ne'er in the world was such another host­
   I turned to records of the olden age 
Wherein great names and virtues are inscribed, 
And found that much was lacking to my tale.

   Yet now my thoughts to foreign heroes turned: 
To Hannibal, and then to Achilles, sung
In verse that gave to him immense renown;
   Two famous Trojans; two great Persian kings; 
Then Philip, and his son, whose swift campaigns 
Won victories from Greece to India;
   The other Alexander, near at hand,
Moving less swiftly: he had mightier foes 
(How much true honor Fortune tears away!);
   The three of Thebes, already named, together; 
Then he who sought to see too much of the world, 
Ulysses; with him Ajax and Diomed;
   Nestor, who knew so much and lived so long; 
And Agamemnon, who with Menelaus, 
Unhappy in wedlock, filled the world with strife;
   Leonidas, who to his troop proposed 
A dinner hard, and supper with the dead, 
And in a narrow pass wrought wondrously;
   And Alcibiades, who so many times 
Turned Athens back and forth, to suit his will, 
By his fair face and by his honeyed words;
   Miltiades, who took the yoke from Greece, 
With his good son, who, loving perfectly, 
Binding himself, set his dead father free;

   Themistocles and Theseus with this group, 
And Aristides-like to our Fabricius­
To whom Athenian burial was denied,
   Their excellence illumined by the vice
Of others: nought so well contrasts two acts
As brevity of intervening time;
   Phocion, banished even in his death,
Was of the company of these three men­
Far different from his deeds was his reward!
   Turning mine eyes, I saw the valiant Pyrrhus, 
And the good king Masinissa-ill content
That he had not had place in the Roman host.
   Gazing this way and that, I saw with him 
The Syracusan Hiero, and then
Cruel Hamilcar, far removed from them.
   The Lydian king I saw, as from the fire 
Naked he came, making it manifest
That nought avails against the will of Fate.
   I beheld Syphax, prey to like distress, 
Brennus, so many of whose followers fell­
As he too fell, below the Delphic fane.
   Great was the throng, and various in dress. 
Then, looking upward toward a height, I saw
A group all closely gathered, and aloof

   Foremost therein was he who planned to build 
A dwelling place for God among mankind;
But he who built came after him, for so
   It was ordained. He raised the holy House, 
From base to summit-but within his heart
He builded not so well, as I infer.
   Then he who had received such grace from God 
That he held converse with Him, face to face,
A privilege no other man can claim;
   And he who, by the virtue of his speech,
Did bind the sun, even as a beast is caught,
That he might still pursue his enemies:
   Oh noble faith! That he who worships God
Is master over all that God creates
And with his simple words may stay the heavens!
   And then I saw our father, who was called
To leave his homeland, and to make his way
To the place that was elect for our salvation;
   With him his son, and his son's son, deceived 
As to his wives; and then, somewhat apart,
I saw that son's son, ]oseph, wise and chaste;
   And gazing then as far as I could gaze
I saw him beyond whom no eye may reach, 
Whose disobedience despoiled the world.

   Nearer, I saw the builder of the Ark, 
And he who undertook to build the tower 
Laden so heavily with fault and sin;
   Then Judas Maccabaeus, who held true 
To his father's laws, invincible and bold,
As one rushing on death for a just cause.
   My will to see was growing weary now, 
Till I beheld a new and gracious sight
That made me still more eager than before.
   A troop of warrior women now I saw: 
Antiope and Orithia, armed and fair; 
Hippolyta, mourning for her lifeless son,
   And Menalippe, each of them so swift 
That Hercules could hardly vanquish them­
And one he kept, the other gave to Theseus;
   The widow who, unweeping, saw her son 
In death, and then for him such vengeance took 
That she slew Cyrus, and now slays his fame:
   For even now, hearing his dreadful end, 
He seems again to be dying in his guilt,
So much of honor did he lose that day!
   Then I saw her who in an evil hour
Saw Troy; and with them too the Latin maid 
Who fought the Trojan band in Italy.
   And then I saw the queen, high-spirited, 
Who with her hair half kempt and half unkempt 
Sped to 0' ercome revolt in Babylon,
   And Cleopatra, both of them aflame
With wrongful love; and in the line I saw 
Zenobia, more jealous of her honor:
   For she was fair, and in the flower of youth, 
And all the more in beauty and in youth
To cherish honor is to merit praise;
   And in her woman's heart was strength so great 
That with her beauty and her armored locks
She brought dismay to men unused to fear­
   I speak of the imperial might of Rome
That she assailed in war-albeit at last
She for our triumph was a wealthy prize.
   Among the names that I must disregard
Shall not be that of Judith, widow brave,
Who reft her foolish lover of his head.
   But Ninus, with whom history begins, 
Where leave I him? And where his great successor? 
Whose pride reduced him to a bestial life?
   Where too is Belus, worshiped sinfully,
But not through his own fault? Where Zoroaster, 
With whom the use of magic arts began?

   And where is he who, east of the Euphrates, 
So fiercely dealt with our ill-starred commanders­
A sorry plaster for Italic woes!
   Where the great Mithridates, that eternal 
Foe of the Romans-from whose toils he fled, 
Summer or winter, to return again!
   Much greatness now most briefly I compress. 
Where is King Arthur? Where three emperors, 
An African, a Spaniard, and a Gaul?
   With Arthur were his dozen paladins. 
Thereafter the duke Godfrey came alone,
To undertake crusade and righteous steps,
   Who in Jerusalem with his own hands
Built the nest now bereft of care or guard, 
Whence in my wrath I cry aloud-in vain!
   Live on, ye wretched Christians, in your pride, 
Consuming one the other, caring not
That the tomb of Christ be in the clutch of dogs!
   Few men, if any, saw I after him
Rise to high fame, if I be not deceived,
Either through arts of peace or arts of war.
   And yet, as men who are elect come last, 
Near to the end I saw the Saracen
who to our armies brought such shame and harm;

   And he of Loria followed Saladin.
Then came the Duke of Lancaster, who erst 
Was a rough neighbor to the realm of France.
   Then, like a man who presses still ahead,
I strove to see if I could recognize
Any whom I had seen aforetime, here on earth;
   And I saw two who only yestereve 
Departed from our life and from our land;
They were the two who closed the honored troop:
   The good Sicilian king, of high intent, 
Truly an Argus in his foresight keen,
And by his side I saw my great Colonna,
   Constant and generous, and of noble heart.

III


   I scarce could take mine eyes from such a sight 
Until a voice said: "Look to the other side: 
'Tis not in arms alone that fame is won."
   I turned to the left; and Plato there I saw, 
Who of them all came closest to the goal 
Where to by Heaven's grace man may attain;
   Then Aristotle, of high intellect, 
Pythagoras, who in humility
First gave philosophy its fitting name;

   Socrates, Xenophon, and the aged bard
To whom the Muses were so kind that Troy 
And Argos and Mycenae know thereof:
   He, first to paint men's ancient memories, 
Sang of the toils and of the wanderings
Of the son of Laertes, and of a goddess' son.
   And side by side with him, singing, there went 
The Mantuan, who seems to rival him,
And one whose passing made the grass to bloom:
   This is that Marcus Tullius, in whom
The fruits and flowers of eloquence appear: 
Theirs are the eyes that light our Latin tongue.
   Then came Demosthenes, hoping no more 
That to the highest place he might attain,
And ill content with second honors, yet
   He seemed to be a fiery thunderbolt:
Let Aeschines report, who, hearing, knew
His own voice faint beside that mighty voice.
   I cannot rightly and in order tell 
Where 'twas, or when, I saw this man or that, 
Or who came first and who came afterward.
   For, thinking of innumerable things,
And gazing at the great and noble throng,
My eyes and thoughts were straying constantly.

   Solon I saw, who nursed the useful plant 
That, if it be ill tended, bears but ill:
And the six sages of whom Greece is proud.
   Leading the company of our land, I saw 
Varro, the third of the great lights of Rome, 
Who shines the more, the more you gaze at him;
   Crispus Sallustius then; and at his side
One who held him in scorn, and envied him­
And this was Livy, the great Paduan.
   While I was watching him I chanced to see 
Pliny, his neighbor of Verona, who,
Wise in his writings, was unwise in death.
   The Platonist Plotinus then I saw,
Who, thinking himself safe in solitude,
Was overtaken by the destiny
   That had been with him ever since his birth, 
So that his providence availed him nought; 
Hortensius, Crassus, Galba and Antony;
   Calvus and Pollio, who grew so proud 
That they made wordy war on Cicero,
Seeking a fame that they did not deserve.
   Thucydides I saw, who clearly tells
The times and places and the valiant deeds
Of war, and who it was that fought and bled.

   I saw the father of Grecian history, 
Herodotus; the great geometer,
Bedecked with circles, triangles and squares;
   Then Porphyry, a stone against our faith, 
Who with the sharpness of his syllogisms
His quiver filled, and used his sophistries
   As weapons in his fight against the truth; 
Hippocrates, who much advanced his art
By dicta given now but little heed;
   Before him Aesculapius and Apollo, 
Shrouded so close they scarce could be discerned, 
Their names hidden by time and worn away;
   Then Galen followed, who the healing art 
That he found briefly stated and obscure, 
Made fully clear-though it be spoiled today.
   Then Anaxarchus, manly and resolute, 
Then, stronger than a rock, Xenocrates,
Who could not be compelled to a shameful act.
   Then Archimedes, with his eyes down-bent; 
Democritus, absorbed in thought profound; 
Who robbed himself of gold and of his sight;
   Then aged Hippias, who dared to say:
"I know all things"; and then, certain of nought, 
Archesilaus, doubtful of everything;

   Then Heraclitus, covert in his words; 
Diogenes the cynic, covered less,
In what he did, than shame would have required;
   And one who, coming home with foreign lore, 
Felt himself enviable and well content
E'en though his fields were all despoiled and bare.
   Here too I saw the searcher Dicaearchus, 
Quintilian also, Plutarch, Seneca,
Who differed in their several masteries;
   And some I saw who have disturbed the seas 
With adverse winds and wanderings of mind, 
Famed for contention, not for what they knew.
   Like lions or like dragons did they fight
That lash with their tails: what good is there in this, 
Each being well content with what he knows?
   Carneades I saw, so keen of mind
And ready-tongued that when he spoke there seemed 
But little difference' twixt the true and the false.
   He spent his lengthy life and his thoughtfulness 
Seeking to win accord between the sects
Fiercely engaged in literary war;
	But he could not prevail: as doctrines grew
So envy grew, and with the rise of learning Diffused its poisons into swollen hearts.

   'Gainst him of Syros, who raised human hopes, 
Claiming the immortality of the soul,
Came Epicurus (whence his fame is less)
   Who dared to argue that it was not true­
So infamous and blinded was his light!­
And those who followed him, as Metrodorus
   And Aristippus, held to their master's thought. 
Then with a marvelous spindle and weaver's beam 
I saw Chrysippus weaving a subtle web.
   Antisthenes and Anaximenes
I saw, Anaximander, and then Zeno,
Now with close fist and now with open palm,
   Stating the fair opinion that he held.
